Blog for GPU Accelerated Vector Search Opensearch New Frontier (#3680)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-03-03-GPU-Accelerated-Vector-Search-OpenSearch-New-Frontier.md

---
layout: post
title:  "GPU-accelerated vector search in Opensearch: A new frontier" 
authors:
  - navneev
  - cnolet
  - kshitizgupta21
  - dylantong
  - nwstephens
  - vamshin
date: 2025-03-03
has_science_table: true
categories:
  - technical-posts

> meta_keywords: Vector Database, Vector Engine, k-NN plugin,  OpenSearch 3.0, k-nn search, Vector Search, Semantics Search, Index Build

Reviewer: Please update the meta keywords and description with the following: 

_meta_keywords:_ vector database, GPU acceleration, OpenSearch vector engine, why use GPU acceleration, NVIDIA cuVS,  CAGRA algorithm, improved indexing speed, large-scale vector search

_meta_description:_ Discover how the GPU acceleration feature in OpenSearch dramatically improves vector search performance, reducing indexing time by 9.3x and costs by 3.75x using NVIDIA cuVS technology

Author: sure

meta_description: Learn about how OpenSearch Vector Engine is going to use GPU for accelerating its Vector Index Builds
---

> OpenSearch's adoption as a vector database has grown significantly with the rise of generative AI applications. Vector search workloads are scaling from millions to billions of vectors, making traditional CPU-based indexing both time consuming and cost intensive. To address this challenge, OpenSearch is introducing GPU acceleration as a [preview feature](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2293) for the OpenSearch Vector Engine in the upcoming 3.0 release by using [NVIDIA cuVS](https://github.com/rapidsai/cuvs). By leveraging the massive parallel processing capabilities of GPUs, this new feature dramatically reduces index building time, significantly lowering operational costs while delivering superior performance for large-scale vector workloads.

Reviewer: Please link the words "vector database" in the first sentence here: https://opensearch.org/platform/search/vector-database.html

### Why use GPU acceleration?

> The OpenSearch Vector Engine has made [significant strides](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1599) in 2024, implementing various optimizations including [AVX512 SIMD support](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2056), segment replication, [efficient vector formats](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1853) for reading and writing vectors, [iterative index builds](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1938), [intelligent graph builds](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1942), and [derived source](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2377) for vectors. While these features and optimizations delivered incremental improvements in indexing times, they primarily enhanced the peripheral components of vector search rather than addressing the fundamental performance bottleneck in core vector operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OpenSearch Vector Engine has made [significant strides](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1599) in 2024, implementing various optimizations including [AVX512 SIMD support](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2056), segment replication, [efficient vector formats](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1853) for reading and writing vectors, [iterative index builds](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1938), [intelligent graph builds](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1942), and a [derived source](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2377) for vectors. While these features and optimizations delivered incremental improvements in indexing times, they primarily enhanced the peripheral components of vector search rather than addressing the fundamental performance bottleneck in core vector operations.
```

> Vector operations, particularly distance calculations, are computationally intensive tasks that are ideally suited for parallel processing. GPUs excel in this domain due to their massively parallel architecture, capable of performing thousands of calculations simultaneously. By leveraging GPU acceleration for these compute-heavy vector operations, OpenSearch can dramatically reduce index build times. This not only improves performance but also translates to significant cost savings, as shorter processing times mean reduced resource utilization and lower operational expenses. The GPU's ability to efficiently handle these parallel computations makes it a natural fit for accelerating vector search operations, offering a compelling solution for organizations dealing with large-scale vector datasets.

Reviewer: Consider linking vector operations here: https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/tutorials/vector-operations/index/

Author: Here vector operations means the vector distance calculations. Its no where related to the items on the link.

Reviewer: Just disregard.

## The new architecture

The streamlined, decoupled GPU-accelerated indexing system comprises three core components:

> 1. **Vector Index Build Service** – A dedicated GPU-powered fleet that specializes in high-performance vector index construction. This service operates independently for optimal GPU resource utilization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Vector Index Build Service** – A dedicated GPU-powered fleet that specializes in high-performance vector index construction. This service operates independently to ensure optimal GPU resource utilization.
```

![High Level Architecture](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-03-GPU-Accelerated-Vector-Search-OpenSearch-New-Frontier/high-level-arch.png){: .img-fluid}

The new system uses the following workflow:

1. Documents containing vectors are ingested into OpenSearch using the Bulk API.
2. During flush/merge operations, the Vector Engine:
  - Uploads vectors to the object store.
  - Initiates a GPU-accelerated index build request to GPU fleet.
  - Monitors the build progress.
3. The Vector Index Build Service:
  - Constructs the index using GPU acceleration.
  - Converts the index to a CPU-compatible format.
  - Uploads the completed index to the object store.
4. Finally, the Vector Engine:
  - Downloads the optimized index.
  - Integrates it with existing segment files.
  - Completes the segment creation process.

If any step encounters an error, the system automatically falls back to CPU-based index building to ensure continuous operation. For more information, see the [technical design documents](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2293) and [architecture diagrams](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2294).

### Vector index builds using the CAGRA algorithm

> The GPU workers leverage [NVIDIA cuVS](https://github.com/rapidsai/cuvs) CAGRA algorithm integrated through the [Faiss](https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss) library. [CAGRA](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.15136), or (C)UDA (A)NNS (GRA)ph-based, is a novel approach for graph-based indexing that was built from the ground up for GPU acceleration. CAGRA constructs a graph representation by first building a k-NN graph using either [IVF-PQ](https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/accelerating-vector-search-nvidia-cuvs-ivf-pq-deep-dive-part-1/) or [NN-DESCENT](https://docs.rapids.ai/api/cuvs/nightly/cpp_api/neighbors_nn_descent/) and then removing redundant paths between neighbors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The GPU workers leverage the [NVIDIA cuVS](https://github.com/rapidsai/cuvs) CAGRA algorithm integrated through the [Faiss](https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss) library. [CAGRA](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.15136), or (C)UDA (A)NNS (GRA)ph-based, is a novel approach to graph-based indexing that was built from the ground up for GPU acceleration. CAGRA constructs a graph representation by first building a k-NN graph using either [IVF-PQ](https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/accelerating-vector-search-nvidia-cuvs-ivf-pq-deep-dive-part-1/) or [NN-DESCENT](https://docs.rapids.ai/api/cuvs/nightly/cpp_api/neighbors_nn_descent/) and then removing redundant paths between neighbors.
```

> When a Vector Index Build request arrives at the GPU workers, it carries all necessary parameters for constructing the segment-specific vector index. The Vector Index Build component initiates the process by retrieving the vector file from the object store and loading it into CPU memory. These vectors are then inserted in the CAGRA index through Faiss. Upon completion of the index construction, the system automatically converts the CAGRA index into an HNSW-based format, ensuring compatibility with CPU-based search operations. The converted index is then uploaded to the object store, marking the successful completion of the build request. This ensures that indexes built on GPUs can be efficiently searched on CPU machines while maintaining index building performance benefits.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a Vector Index Build request is received by the GPU workers, it carries all necessary parameters for constructing the segment-specific vector index. The Vector Index Build component initiates the process by retrieving the vector file from the object store and loading it into CPU memory. These vectors are then inserted into the CAGRA index through Faiss. Upon completion of the index construction, the system automatically converts the CAGRA index into an HNSW-based format, ensuring compatibility with CPU-based search operations. The converted index is then uploaded to the object store, marking the successful completion of the build request. This ensures that indexes built on GPUs can be efficiently searched on CPU machines while maintaining index building performance benefits.
```

> ![CAGRA-ALGO](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-03-GPU-Accelerated-Vector-Search-OpenSearch-New-Frontier/cagra-algo-explained.png){: .img-fluid}

Reviewer 3: This image should be referenced in the preceding text.

> **_Source: CAGRA paper https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.15136_**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Source: [CAGRA: Highly Parallel Graph Construction and Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search for GPUs](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.15136)**
```

## Benchmark results

> Initial benchmarking shows significant improvements in indexing performance and cost efficiency. The experiments used a [10M 768D dataset](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/blob/main/vectorsearch/workload.json#L54-L64) and [OpenSearch Benchmark](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/benchmark/). The OpenSearch distribution is available [here](https://github.com/navneet1v/k-NN/releases/download/stagging-remote-index-build-v3/opensearch-2.19.0-SNAPSHOT-linux-arm64.tar.gz).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Initial benchmarking showed significant improvements in indexing performance and cost efficiency. The experiments used a [10M 768D dataset](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/blob/main/vectorsearch/workload.json#L54-L64) and [OpenSearch Benchmark](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/benchmark/). The OpenSearch distribution is available [here](https://github.com/navneet1v/k-NN/releases/download/stagging-remote-index-build-v3/opensearch-2.19.0-SNAPSHOT-linux-arm64.tar.gz).
```

### Test setup

| Key                   | Value       |
|-----------------------|-------------|
| Number of data nodes  | 3           |
| Data node type        | r6g.4xlarge |
| Number of GPU workers | 3           |
| GPU worker type       | g5.2xlarge  |
| OpenSearch version    | 2.19.0      |

### Index configuration

| Key                      | Value |
|--------------------------|-------|
| Number of primary shards | 6     |
| Number of replicas       | 1     |

### Performance comparison

The following table provides our experiment results.

> | Metric                             | Baseline  | GPU-accelerated | Improvement |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Metric                             | Baseline  | GPU accelerated | Improvement |
```

- **Efficient resource usage**: GPU nodes focus solely on vector index building at the segment level, avoiding text index construction. This targeted use minimizes GPU utilization time, maximizing resource efficiency and cost-effectiveness.

- **Enhanced fault tolerance**: An intermediate storage layer acts as a buffer, providing robust error handling. If a GPU worker fails mid-process, index build jobs can be restarted seamlessly, without requiring vector re-uploads, significantly reducing downtime and data transfer overhead.

## Conclusion

GPU-accelerated vector indexing marks a major milestone in OpenSearch's evolution to support large-scale AI workloads. Our benchmarks show **9.3x faster index build times** at **3.75x lower cost** compared to CPU-based solutions, reducing billion-scale index builds from days to hours. While GPU instances cost **1.5x more** than CPU counterparts, the substantial speedup delivers a strong price-performance advantage—further amplified by the shared GPU fleet model for multi-tenant use.

> 

Author: we are just launching indexing here. So indexing is correct

The **decoupled design** ensures flexibility, allowing OpenSearch to adopt future hardware accelerators and algorithmic improvements. The deployment model enables seamless adoption across cloud and on-premises environments. By leveraging the **CAGRA algorithm** from NVIDIA's cuVS library and supporting **GPU-CPU index interoperability**, OpenSearch delivers a robust, scalable solution with built-in error handling and fallback mechanisms for production reliability.

## What's next?

The initial GPU-based index release will support **fp32** for GPU-based index acceleration. Upcoming releases will introduce **fp16 and byte** support to further improve price performance. Additionally, the OpenSearch community continues to enhance vector engine capabilities in order to enable low-latency, high-throughput retrieval, unlocking new possibilities for vector search at scale.

## References

> 

Author: fixed
